# 238. Product of Array Except Self

- The difficulty of the problem comes from its constraints: must be O(n), and cannot use division

## Solutions

### First attempt

```py
from typing import List


class Solution:
    def productExceptSelf(self, nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
        output = [nums[1], nums[0]]
        prev = nums[0] * nums[1]
        for i, num in enumerate(nums):
            if i > 1:
                output.append(prev)
                for j in range(i):
                    output[j] *= num
                prev *= num
        return output
```

- time space = O(n^2) O(1)
- _backside_: keep track of `prev` as the product of the first two initial elements (it's given that `nums.length >= 2`). step through `nums` and update all elements previous by multiplying them with the current `num`, and insert `prev` (which is the product of all products previous to the current `num`) to the current (and corresponding) position of the output array. in essence, with each step, update the elements previous by multiplying it with the current, and update the current with the product of every elements previous.
- couldn't figure out how to do it without the inner loop

### Assisted attempt

```py
from typing import List


class Solution:
    def productExceptSelf(self, nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
        left = [1] * len(nums)
        for i in range(1, len(nums)):
            left[i] = left[i - 1] * nums[i - 1]
        right = [1] * len(nums)
        for i in range(len(nums) - 2, -1, -1):
            right[i] = right[i + 1] * nums[i + 1]
        return [left[i] * right[i] for i in range(len(nums))]
```

- Needed help from [NeetCode Solution](https://youtu.be/bNvIQI2wAjk)
- time space = O(n) O(n)
  - 3 passes for each
- _backside_: Create a 'left' array where every element is the product of each element that is previous (or left) of `nums[i]`. start at 1 (not 0), and initialize `left[0] = 1`. som `left[1]` is `left[0] * nums[0]`, `left[2]` is `left[1] * nums[1]`, etc. Create a 'right' array that is similar, every element is the product of each element that is right of `nums[i]`. create a resultant `answers` array where every element is `left[i] * right[i]`, making it so that `answers[i]` is the product of "the product of every element left of `nums[i]`" and "the product of every element right of `nums[i]`"
- Can be O(1) space by just passing

### Best solution

```py
class Solution:
    def productExceptSelf(self, nums):
        ans, suf, pre = [1]*len(nums), 1, 1
        for i in range(len(nums)):
            ans[i] *= pre               # prefix product from one end
            pre *= nums[i]
			ans[-1-i] *= suf            # suffix product from other end
			suf *= nums[-1-i]
        return ans
```

- [Source](https://leetcode.com/problems/product-of-array-except-self/solutions/1597994/c-python-4-simple-solutions-w-explanation-prefix-suffix-product-o-1-space-approach/?orderBy=most_votes)
- time space = O(n) O(1)
  - 1 pass, 1 resultant array
- _backside_: fill the `ans` array from both sides with each step by having two indices. the indices are relative to a singular `i` thanks to negative indexing. keep a running product of elements left of the left index with `pre`, and similarly right of the right index with `suf`. with each step, first update the left and right indices of `ans`, then update the running products. in this way, you are making one pass, but it's pseudo-concurrently. each element is updated twice, once each from both indices. this way, eventually, each element will be a product of every element left of them, and every element right of them.

## Observations

- sad that I couldn't get this on my own. I need to really timebox myself though. can't spend all my work energy on leetcode or puzzles that are already solved. need to make a solid attempt (1 hour), then cut off my learning about the solution to max 1 hour. it's frustrating, i'm stubborn. but i need to remind myself that it's impossible to become a genius. it's very possible to become an expert.
- also, `vim` is not suitable for editing `.md`s, because i'm **not** going to ~~redacted~~ delineate (or according to binggpt) manually _justify_ my bullet points, which is what i'd have to do if i want `vim` to be able to navigate similarly to how arrow keys already navigate through my text
